src/content/blog/2024-08-18_lfc/index.mdx, before:

---
title: 'A small (in progress) documentation of LCF formats (RPG Maker 2000/2003)'
description: "A primer to understand EasyRPG"
pubDate: 2024-08-18
heroImage: './header.svg'
---

Recently I've been interested in reverse engineering binary formats. And since I've also watched
some streams of RPG Maker 2000 games and thought that might be a good place to start without
surprises. It wasn't quite that easy. And understanding
[the existing open source implementation](https://github.com/EasyRPG/liblcf) (EasyRPG)
wasn't that simple, due to it's mixture of auto-generated and template heavy code.

And while I am going to refer you to some of EasyRPG's CSV files, there are some base concepts you
need to know when you try to parse them yourself.

So far, I've only looked at the MapTree, but to my understanding, they all use the same
serialization logic. In fact, according to
[somebody](https://community.easyrpg.org/t/proper-lcf-format-documentation/1203), they use some kind
of default Borland Delphi Object Dump format. But I've not found any good documentation of that
either.

If I continue to explore this format in the future, I'll update this post.

# Data types

## Number

Numbers in the format use [VLQ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variable-length_quantity), or base
128. The number is read byte for byte. The last 7 bits encode the number, the first bit says if the
number continues to the next byte. Here is a pseudo code implementation:

```
VALUE = 0
DO:
    CURRENT_BYTE = GET_NEXT_BYTE()
    VALUE = VALUE << 7
    VALUE = VALUE | (CURRENT_BYTE & 0b0111_1111)
WHILE VALUE & 0b1000_0000
```

And
[here](https://github.com/EasyRPG/liblcf/blob/505496cb0c4ad846c5e2d346aed447ecd625f7f0/src/reader_lcf.cpp#L86)
is the EasyRPG implementation.

## String

Strings are not null delimited. Instead, string values start with the [length](#number) of the
string in bytes.

For the encoding, the default windows codepage
([`GetACP`](https://learn.microsoft.com/de-de/windows/win32/api/winnls/nf-winnls-getacp)) for the
current locale is used. EasyRPG uses a
[custom table](https://github.com/EasyRPG/liblcf/blob/505496cb0c4ad846c5e2d346aed447ecd625f7f0/src/reader_util.cpp#L214)
for non-windows systems.

If we look for example at the start of an RPG_RT.lmt file, it starts with:

```
\x0ALcfMapTree
```

The first byte of which is just the length of the file type afterwards, 10.

## Array

Arrays start with the [length](#number) of the array, directly followed by the elements. Each
element starts with the [index](#number) of the current element, then the actual value.

## Object

Objects are segmented into segments that EasyRPG calls "chunks". Every chunk starts with an [index
number](#number), then the [length](#number) of the payload, and then the payload.

This is where the
[CSV files](https://github.com/EasyRPG/liblcf/blob/505496cb0c4ad846c5e2d346aed447ecd625f7f0/generator/csv/fields.csv)
from EasyRPG come in.

These CSV files describe the type, name and comments for each chunk in all the RPG Maker LCF files.

The chunks with the index `0x00` immediately end the object. They don't have a length or payload.

Chunks can be omitted if the payload is just the default value. For example, in the map tree file,
map entries (MapInfo in the csv file) can have the chunks `0x02` parentMap, `0x03` indentation (nesting
level in the tree) and `0x04` type.

But the root node has no parentMap and an indentation of 0, so these are skipped and its first
chunk is `0x04`.

Children of the root node have the parentMap 0, which is the default and as such is also skipped.
They have an indentation of 1 though, so they start with chunk `0x03`.

# An example, the LcfMapTree file

The RPGMaker 2K map tree contains some meta information about the maps, such as the map name,
encounter rates, background music, stuff like that.

It starts with the [string](#string) `\x0ALcfMapTree`, as a kind of
[magic number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_format#Magic_number).

This is followed by an [array](#array) of
[MapInfo](https://github.com/EasyRPG/liblcf/blob/505496cb0c4ad846c5e2d346aed447ecd625f7f0/generator/csv/fields.csv#L603)
objects.

Each entry starts with an index number, and then the chucks of MapInfo object.

At the end of the list, a new list starts, which only describes the order of the MapInfo objects in
the tree. So it's just a series of numbers, without index numbers.

After that, a single number that tells you which map is active, so the last map that was selected in the editor.

That's the end of the file.

Commit message:

LFC: Added information about the name

src/content/blog/2024-08-18_lfc/index.mdx, after:

---
title: 'A small (in progress) documentation of LCF formats (RPG Maker 2000/2003)'
description: "A primer to understand EasyRPG"
pubDate: 2024-08-18
heroImage: './header.svg'
---

Recently I've been interested in reverse engineering binary formats. And since I've also watched
some streams of RPG Maker 2000 games and thought that might be a good place to start without
surprises. It wasn't quite that easy. And understanding
[the existing open source implementation](https://github.com/EasyRPG/liblcf) (EasyRPG)
wasn't that simple, due to it's mixture of auto-generated and template heavy code.

And while I am going to refer you to some of EasyRPG's CSV files, there are some base concepts you
need to know when you try to parse them yourself.

So far, I've only looked at the MapTree, but to my understanding, they all use the same
serialization logic. In fact, according to
[somebody](https://community.easyrpg.org/t/proper-lcf-format-documentation/1203), they use some kind
of default Borland Delphi Object Dump format. But I've not found any good documentation of that
either.

If I continue to explore this format in the future, I'll update this post.

# The name

The format is referred to as LCF, because each of the RPG Maker files start with a magic string
beginning with `LCF`. It is generally accepted that LCF is short for "Lucifer", which was the
development name of RPG Maker 2000.

Although it could obviously also be "Lucifer C[Something] Format", but since it just seems to be
a default delphi serialization format, I'm guessing the string comes from a class name in RPG
Makers code, there wouldn't be a reason to give it a fancy format name.

# Data types

## Number

Numbers in the format use [VLQ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variable-length_quantity), or base
128. The number is read byte for byte. The last 7 bits encode the number, the first bit says if the
number continues to the next byte. Here is a pseudo code implementation:

```
VALUE = 0
DO:
    CURRENT_BYTE = GET_NEXT_BYTE()
    VALUE = VALUE << 7
    VALUE = VALUE | (CURRENT_BYTE & 0b0111_1111)
WHILE VALUE & 0b1000_0000
```

And
[here](https://github.com/EasyRPG/liblcf/blob/505496cb0c4ad846c5e2d346aed447ecd625f7f0/src/reader_lcf.cpp#L86)
is the EasyRPG implementation.

## String

Strings are not null delimited. Instead, string values start with the [length](#number) of the
string in bytes.

For the encoding, the default windows codepage
([`GetACP`](https://learn.microsoft.com/de-de/windows/win32/api/winnls/nf-winnls-getacp)) for the
current locale is used. EasyRPG uses a
[custom table](https://github.com/EasyRPG/liblcf/blob/505496cb0c4ad846c5e2d346aed447ecd625f7f0/src/reader_util.cpp#L214)
for non-windows systems.

If we look for example at the start of an RPG_RT.lmt file, it starts with:

```
\x0ALcfMapTree
```

The first byte of which is just the length of the file type afterwards, 10.

## Array

Arrays start with the [length](#number) of the array, directly followed by the elements. Each
element starts with the [index](#number) of the current element, then the actual value.

## Object

Objects are segmented into segments that EasyRPG calls "chunks". Every chunk starts with an [index
number](#number), then the [length](#number) of the payload, and then the payload.

This is where the
[CSV files](https://github.com/EasyRPG/liblcf/blob/505496cb0c4ad846c5e2d346aed447ecd625f7f0/generator/csv/fields.csv)
from EasyRPG come in.

These CSV files describe the type, name and comments for each chunk in all the RPG Maker LCF files.

The chunks with the index `0x00` immediately end the object. They don't have a length or payload.

Chunks can be omitted if the payload is just the default value. For example, in the map tree file,
map entries (MapInfo in the csv file) can have the chunks `0x02` parentMap, `0x03` indentation (nesting
level in the tree) and `0x04` type.

But the root node has no parentMap and an indentation of 0, so these are skipped and its first
chunk is `0x04`.

Children of the root node have the parentMap 0, which is the default and as such is also skipped.
They have an indentation of 1 though, so they start with chunk `0x03`.

# An example, the LcfMapTree file

The RPGMaker 2K map tree contains some meta information about the maps, such as the map name,
encounter rates, background music, stuff like that.

It starts with the [string](#string) `\x0ALcfMapTree`, as a kind of
[magic number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File_format#Magic_number).

This is followed by an [array](#array) of
[MapInfo](https://github.com/EasyRPG/liblcf/blob/505496cb0c4ad846c5e2d346aed447ecd625f7f0/generator/csv/fields.csv#L603)
objects.

Each entry starts with an index number, and then the chucks of MapInfo object.

At the end of the list, a new list starts, which only describes the order of the MapInfo objects in
the tree. So it's just a series of numbers, without index numbers.

After that, a single number that tells you which map is active, so the last map that was selected in the editor.

That's the end of the file.
